From hlapp at nescent.org  Sun Aug  1 23:13:00 2010
From: hlapp at nescent.org (Hilmar Lapp)
Date: Sun, 1 Aug 2010 23:13:00 -0400
Subject: [Wg-phyloinformatics] GMOD Evo Hackathon Open Call for Participation
Message-ID: <E33FBC12-3350-406A-94A7-0078F978C08A@nescent.org>

Apologies if you have received this message before. We are trying to  
reach out broadly.
-----------------

We are seeking participants for the GMOD Tools for Evolutionary  
Biology Hackathon, held November 8-12, 2010 at the US National  
Evolutionary Synthesis Center (NESCent) in Durham, NC.

This hackathon targets three critical gaps in the capabilities of the  
GMOD toolbox that currently limit its utility for evolutionary research:
  1. Visualization of comparative genomics data
  2. Visualization of phylogenetic data and trees
  3. Support for population diversity and phenotype data

If you are interested in these areas and have relevant expertise, you  
are strongly encouraged to apply.  Relevant areas of expertise include  
more than just software development: if you are a GMOD power user,  
visualization guru, domain expert (comparative, phylogenetics,  
population, ...), or documentation wizard, then your skills are needed!

How To Apply:
Fill out the online application form at http://bit.ly/gmodevohack.   
Applications are due August 25.

About GMOD:
GMOD is an intercompatible suite of open-source software components  
for storing, managing, analyzing, and visualizing genome-scale data.  
GMOD includes many widely-used software components: GBrowse and  
JBrowse, both genome viewers; GBrowse_syn, a comparative genomics  
viewer; Chado, a generic and modular database schema; CMap, a  
comparative map viewer; as well as many other components including  
Apollo, MAKER, BioMart, InterMine, and Galaxy.  We hope to extend the  
functionality of existing GMOD components, and integrate new  
components as well.

About Hackathons:
A hackathon is an intense event at which a group of programmers with  
different backgrounds and skills collaborate hands-on and face-to-face  
to develop working code that is of utility to the community as a  
whole. The mix of people will include domain experts and computer- 
savvy end-users.

More details about the event, its motivation, organization,  
procedures, and attendees, as well as URLs to the hackathon and  
related websites are included below.

Sincerely,

The GMOD EvoHack Organizing Committee (and project affiliations as  
relevant):
Nicole Washington, Chair (LBNL, modENCODE, Phenote)
Robert Buels (SGN, Chado NatDiv)
Scott Cain (OICR, GMOD)
Dave Clements (NESCent, GMOD)
Hilmar Lapp (NESCent, Phenoscape, Chado NatDiv)
Sheldon McKay (University of Arizona, iPlant, GBrowse_syn)

-----------------------------

About the GMOD Evo Hackathon

Overview

We are organizing a hackathon to fill critical gaps in the  
capabilities of the Generic Model Organism Database (GMOD) toolbox  
that currently limit its utility for evolutionary research.  
Specifically, we will focus on tools for 1) viewing comparative  
genomics data; 2) visualizing phylogenomic data; and 3) supporting  
population diversity data and phenotype annotation.

The event will be hosted at NESCent and bring together a group of  
about 20+ software developers, end-user representatives, and  
documentation experts who would otherwise not meet. The participants  
will include key developers of GMOD components that currently lack  
features critical for emerging evolutionary biology research,  
developers of informatics tools in evolutionary research that lack  
GMOD integration, and informatics-savvy biologists who can represent  
end-user requirements.

The event will provide a unique opportunity to infuse the GMOD  
developer community with a heightened awareness of unmet needs in  
evolutionary biology that GMOD components have the potential to fill,  
and for tool developers in evolutionary biology to better understand  
how best to extend or integrate with already existing GMOD components.

Before the Event

Discussion of ideas and sometimes even design actually starts well  
before the hackathon, on mailing lists, wiki pages, and conference  
calls set up among accepted attendees.  This advance work lays the  
foundation for participants to be productive from the very first day.   
This also means that participants should be willing to contribute some  
time in advance of the hackathon itself to participate in this  
preparatory discussion.

During the Event

Typically, hackathon participants use the morning of the first day of  
the event to organize themselves into working groups of between 3 and  
6 people, each with a focused implementation objective.  Ideas and  
objectives are discussed, and attendees coalesce around the projects  
in which they have the most experience or interest.

Deliverables / Event Results

The meeting?s attendance, working groups, and outcomes will be fully  
logged and documented on the GMOD wiki (http://gmod.org).  Each  
working group during the event will typically have its own wiki page,  
linked from the main EvoHack page, where it documents its minutes and  
design notes, and provides links to the code and documentation it  
produces.  Also, since GMOD and NESCent are both committed to open  
source principles, all code and documentation produced by participants  
during the hackathon must be published under an OSI-approved open  
source license.  As contributions to existing GMOD tools, all  
hackathon products will most likely satisfy this requirement  
automatically.

NESCent

This event is sponsored by the US National Evolutionary Synthesis  
Center (NESCent, http://www.nescent.org) through its Informatics  
Whitepapers program (http://www.nescent.org/informatics/ 
whitepapers.php). NESCent promotes the synthesis of information,  
concepts and knowledge to address significant, emerging, or novel  
questions in evolutionary science and its applications. NESCent  
achieves this by supporting research and education across  
disciplinary, institutional, geographic, and demographic boundaries  
(see http://www.nescent.org/science/proposals.php).
Links

Main GMOD EvoHack page, and full proposal: http://gmod.org/wiki/GMOD_Evo_Hackathon

NESCent: http://www.nescent.org/
GMOD: http://gmod.org
Similar past NESCent events, see: http://hackathon.nescent.org/
GMOD hackathon application:  http://bit.ly/gmodevohack